a quiz or a question on a quiz in a geology course
that I was taking. Somehow or another metal got
involved and I said all this scrap metal that we've
been shipping over to Japan, I was loaded in 1941,
in the spring of 1941, will come back in the way of
bombs. And I remember answering the question on my
geology quiz. And so I don't know. Of course, we
didn't know about Pearl Harbor. But it was fairly
obvious. And then, my lord, you get ordered to
active duty before you graduate.
Now, with a straight face, what war opposition
groups were there on the campus? None.
None. Let's go to a lighter topic. How did a young
Aggie get a date in your undergraduate years? Well
there was somebody back in your hometown that you
would invite down. Or if you happened to know some
gal from Bryan.
Or you had none. And to what activities would she
normally be in? Well you've got, of course the big
thing you've seen in years, you've seen her ring
dance. But then RV holidays, another. And then
they had various balls during the year. Each
regiment had one, as I recall.
I don't remember ever having a date on the campus
until I was a senior.
But that was just me and others. they weren't
bringing down trainloads of Tessies in those
days. A lot of gals came down from CIA.
I've heard stories later about moose pots and
beast buckets. Those are unfamiliar terms. Who
got stuck with the worst moose? Or which girl got
stuck with the worst beast? I never heard that. If a
young woman was on campus in for a weekend, where
did she stay? In a dorm or some privileged view at
Aggieland Inn. Would y'all clear out a dorm? Yes,
vacate. Like in Puryear, for example, they had
ramps. Just clear out two or three ramps. And they
were very strictly observed. Was a young man
without a date allowed to go to one of these dances?
Sure he could go. And how often did a pretty young
lady get cut in on? Often. And what do you think was
the impression that Aggies made on these young
ladies? Well, you could hear all kinds of stories
after the fact. I've talked to a lot of women since
1941. They tell you I used to go with A&M and loved it
and loved it. Yeah. That's what I've heard. That's
what I've heard. Yeah, they like to come. Well, why
not? They were treated royally. And how did the
young man and young woman dress for these dances?
Well, of course, we wore uniform and ladies wore
evening gowns. Were there any big-time bands that
came? Sure. Plenty. Such as? Well, whatever. I
can't remember. Artie Shaw... Even the fellow
that says a one, a two, a three, champagne music.
Lawrence Welk? Yeah, he was there. We had him for an
RV dance, playing beautiful music. The major
bands, the Dorsey band, everyone. And these were
in Sabeasa? In Sabeasa. And what was the conduct
pattern of people? How did everybody behave? Very
well. And could the dance go all night? No. No, it
happened at midnight, one o'clock, whatever,
curfew. Let's see. You didn't have a car. No. Did
anybody in your outfit have one that everybody
used? No.
Describe the community around the campus. What
was College Station then? Where was it? What was
it? Well, College Station in those days
essentially was, to some extent, at Northgate,
And on each of the two corners there, there were
drug stores. And then Honick Boot Shop was down
there, and Aggieland Photographers or whatever,
they were down there. No eating places at all. Was
the movie there? The campus theater? The campus
theater was there. Yeah, there was a movie. As a
matter of fact, I was the director of Aggie Tone
News. Tell me about Aggie Tone News. Well...
Somebody had an idea that we should produce a
newsreel, special events. And of course it was
just, it was video. Yeah, you had no sound to it or
anything, but a picture of a parade, a halftime
ceremony, a football game or whatever. And there
weren't very many. We only did it for maybe a half a
dozen times. would write out the script for it, and
they played them at that theater down there. And
you set up in a booth someplace, and while the thing
is being shown, you're talking. So when I say the
director of Aggietone News, I was the only one that
spoke to it, while it was going on. Was this a
paying? No. Director of Narration. Ah, that would
do it. That's it. Director of Narration of Agaton.
Was there anything at Southgate then? Maidley's
Pharmacy, was it there yet? No. Okay. Southgate,
Southgate. Immediately south of Project Houses?
Nothing. Okay. Nothing. Okay. And Old Army Lou
wasn't yet in business, was he? Yes, I believe he
was. Oh. I believe, maybe I'm confusing it with
after the war. Where did the faculty live? They
lived south toward Navasota. That's where the
first residential district that I can remember,
plus some north. Were there some residences on
campus? No. Yes, the president had a house, and
Baratracks Bolton had a house. He was the dean.
People said, the dean of men? I said, no, he was just
the dean. But... Did y'all have a nickname for
Gilchrist, dean of engineering? I didn't have
one. He would just give the... T.O. Walton was the
president of the great... Nickname for him? Just,
I don't remember any. He just was much respected
and admired. Describe him. Well, he was just a very
low-key fellow. Very friendly. Big little,
normal sized man as I remember. One big man on
campus was Ike Ashburn. And he officed down in the,
what we called
the, we called it the, not the system building, I
forget now what we called it, the beautiful Greek,
The one down east, on the east side? Okay, in the new
Jack Williams building. It will be. That's
correct. But Ike Ashburn was... Do you remember
what his task was? Well, he was sort of a PR man, an
administrative assistant of a type. The guy must
have weighed 300 pounds. He was just a huge fellow.
He had an office in Austin and was in charge of Texas
roadways or something. He was a politician of a
type. But he was a great favorite, and he taught a
course, a one hour course to seniors on nothing.
And you made an A in it. I mean, it just was one of
those giveaways, the only giveaway I remember.
And he attended various things. For example, I was
the master of ceremonies at the senior ring dance.
And when I introduced him, I said, Our next guest is
living evidence that an army travels on its
stomach. It is with pleasure I present to you
Colonel Ike Ashburn. Everybody just roared,
including Ike. Oh, great. He stood up and came to
the mic, and he said, Anybody as big as I am that made
a speech on an occasion like this ought to have
things thrown at you. So thank you very much for the
invitation. And he went over and sat down. So
everybody got a big kick out of it. But I said,
living evidence, proof that an army travels on its
own. But he was known as Colonel Ike. Was the
commandant important? Oh, yeah. The commandant
and the professor of military science and tactics
were different, too. Who was the commandant?
Colonel George F. Moore. was there and he left at
the end of my junior year and a fella came and took
his place my senior year and everybody hated his
guts. George Moore, George F. Moore was an Aggie,
class of 23, something like that. Later became a
major general and was on Corregidor. Where?
George F. Moore. The Commandant just performed
ministerial functions and had nothing to do
really with the military.
Let's see, student indulgences, court trips, a
typical Aggie football day in College Station, or
maybe football weekend. Well, you had the
practice on Friday night, went to class Saturday,
oftentimes got out at noon time, and you just
walked over to the ballpark and The freshmen sat
down at the bottom and back of them the sophomores
and back of them the juniors and back of them the
seniors. Wait, the freshmen sat nearest the
field? Yes. They stood nearest the field. That's
right. The sophomores standing in back of them and
then the juniors and then the seniors. Did y'all
march in? No. Did the band march in? Maybe. What
about halftime? Always marched. Describe, make
believe I'd never seen an Aggie band at halftime
about this farmed up at the north end of the field
like they do today and and marched what what jazz
what jazz and rock music did they play none of
course oh and in those days you see the first
reveille was there oh hey describe the first rebel
okay she was just a dog a mongrel dog What color?
Brown.
She was there when I got there, but she'd only been
there a couple of years as I recall. The story is
really sort of hazy. Somewhere or another she was
injured, and Corman coming back from a weekend
trip someplace, either saw her get hurt or caused
her to be hurt or whatever out in the roadway, and
they brought her back to Constitution. I know that
she was there when I got there, and she'd been there
about two or three years, but no longer. She was not
kept by a unit. She was an 800-pound gorilla. She
did what she wanted to do, and she seemed to know.
which beds were occupied by freshmen. Because if
she came into a room and got into a freshman's bed,
he got out. And she also ate at Sabisa. Now, were
there other dogs? No. No. And she marched with the
band, not on a leash. And that band, she went and
made court trips. And that band would be out there
and they would each say, just counter march. And
she's right there in the middle of them and never
interfered with a single marcher. Did she bark at
the right times? Yes. She was spoiled a lot. But she
marched with the band and never interfered with
anybody. When the new part of the campus, Queen
Mudd Junior, what we called it the new area, now the
quad, When the band went over there, the band had a
responsibility for her own courthouse. And so
they took her over there to the new area. And she
stayed not one night because it was a new area to
her. So she came back to the old area. And did she
sleep in a... In wherever she wanted to. And was it
quite often different? Yes, but over in the old
area. She spent an awful lot of time around the Y.
That was very familiar to her. Law and Furrier and
Mitchell and Hart. If you could guess about her
ancestry, type of dog, what do you think? A mix of
goodness knows what. I really don't know. I really
don't know. No, she was a medium-sized dog. And she
was just spoiled rotten. She'd just look at you.
Come here, Red. Come here, Red. I'm sorry I
interrupted you. Thanks. It works okay. Thanks.
The yells, you all stood during the game. Were
yells similar then to now? Yes. Most of the yells
were the same. They've got some different ones
now. Were there some that were done then maybe in
bad taste? No. OK. No. And none of this beat the hell
out of that. We tried when they started doing that.
When I say we, a number of us, me and him, spoke to
them and suggested they abandon Yale. They just
thumbed their nose at us. Well, and I tried to tell
them, too, that's a vulgar gesture. It really is,
and they know what it is. And I remember when it
started. I remember. We tried to discourage it,
and they paid no attention to it. But we didn't have
that yell. We used to when a substitution was
different in those days. A player came out like
Marion Pugh now was a quarterback, and we'd say,
we'd spell it out.
A-U-G-H, Pugh, Pugh, Pugh. So if somebody had
played well, they'd spell her name out. All right,
when the game was over, and... Crashman went after
the elevator. And where did they get thrown? They
got thrown in... There was some place close to
Military Walk. Yeah, the north end of Military
Walk near Sabisa, I think. I guess, yeah. Fish
Pond, they called it. Of the various...
I'll tell you another thing that happened. This
also happened even after the war. We picked up the
visiting football team, carried them off the
field. Oh, but not in anger, but you mean carried
him off on his shoulders. That's right. That's
right. Bear Bryant, he said that's what
influenced him to leave Kentucky and come to A&M.
Kentucky came over there and played, and they
picked up his football team and carried him off the
field. We've always been the best sportsmen when
the other side's song is being sung, and none of
this business of running out on a field while he and
him are singing. Those things still anger me to
this day, and they're deliberate, absolutely
deliberate. But
we used to win the sportsmanship award year after
year after year because we were great sportsmen.
What were some of your football game memories? Oh,
well, you see, we were national champions when I
was there. Which games do you remember with
greatest joy? Every one of my junior and all but one
of my senior years. I remember of course the first
game I ever saw at Kyle Field A&M played Sam Houston
and Dick Todd was running back and took the
kickoff. Ran for a touchdown, first time I ever saw
him touch the ball. Played a little bit for the
Washington Redskins after that. My junior year,
you see, we won everything.
And went out and played Tulane in the Sugar Bowl and
won that game and were 19, national champion in
1939. Then 1940, 41, we won nine games in a row. And
we were going on to the Rose Bowl, just Austin stood
in the way. Cuz in those days they didn't have that
contract between the Big Ten and the Pac-10. And we
were on our way to the Rose Bowl, and we got beat
seven to nothing in Austin. They scored on the
third play of the game, and that was the only score
in the game. And it was a sad, sad day. We didn't
leave the stands after the game, and the band was
playing taps. And those damn T-7s came down there
and interrupted the thing. Could easily have had a
fight right then and there. Among the football
players, did you have some favorite
acquaintances? Not really. Jim Thomason. was
active in the Corps, I believe was a cadet major.
My senior year, one of the freshmen in my outfit was
named Martin Ruby. He played pro ball. They just
sort of led their own lives separately, but Jim
Thomason was the fullback. And he was in the Corps.
I remember Chip Rowder, you see, Kimbrough,
classmate. Willie Conacher, classmate. Marion
Pugh, classmate. Chip Rout, classmate. Marshall
Robinette, classmate. Joe Boyd was in the class of
40. He was a great favorite with the Colts. He was a
nice guy. Turned out to be a Baptist preacher. But
they were sort of... Did athletes go to class? I
don't know what they did. Did they graduate? I
don't know what they did. I think they did in those
days. I think they did. Let's see. You went to
commencements, but you didn't get to go to your
own. Did you go to some the first three years? Yeah.
Were there any important campus visitors, big
name visitors you remember seeing or hearing?
Other than military people, I don't remember any.
I really don't. There was no white electors
series, special MSC functions. No, and the
president didn't come, and John Nance Garner
didn't come. He could have, but I don't remember
it, and I rather doubt it. Yeah, Pershing didn't
come. No, not that I'm aware of. Let's see. As
you're preparing to leave the campus and
following your graduation, what sort of world did
you think you were entering? What did you think was
it? Well, I just knew that war was imminent. And
sure enough, in six months, Pearl Harbor
happened. And on my 2015, I can remember looking at
it. I can see it today on this occupation student.
So five years later, when I had an opportunity to
integrate in the regular army before the war
started, then when I came back from the Pacific, I
would extend another invitation to integrate in
the regular army, and I turned that down. And then I
had a third time later to do it, and I turned that
down. Even the President of the United States
offered me the Undersecretary of the Army's job,
which I turned down when I sat on the Federal Trade
Commission. All right. How, as you left with the
possibility of war, how well prepared did you
think you were for that responsibility? Well, I
thought I could do anything. Hell, I was 21 years
old and second lieutenant, single. I was ready to
go fight the Japanese. I was madder than hell after
Pearl Harbor. The whole country was mad. What's
the difference? We had identified enemies.
Hitler and Hirohito. and told Joe who rode a white
horse that he was going to ride his horse down
Pennsylvania. Well he never did. He never did. See
today's young people don't understand that at
all. And also because we really haven't had a war
for a long time. Even Vietnam was minute compared
to World War II. Yeah, the Korean War. But it was
different. And so that we are farther now from
World War II than you and I were from the
Spanish-American War. See, because it's 42,
three years from the Spanish-American War to the
Second World War. All right, now we're 52 years
from World War II. Let's see. There were some
interviews that had taken place on the campus for
civilian jobs. I was interviewed by... an
insurance company, and somebody else. I can't
remember now. But, of course, when the orders
came, I was delighted.
Getting out of A&M and not having to go out into the
civilian world, which the country's still in
depression, would have been a tough, tough thing
to do. And it just was made easy with this military
order. As you left, what were your financial
resources? Well, I had none. I had none. I borrowed
$100 my freshman year from this one man, and $100 my
sophomore year from this same man. Then the Rotary
Club had a program where you could borrow $200, but
only juniors and seniors. So I borrowed $200 my
junior year and $200 my senior year. Of course I
worked in the summer, but I had nothing. I had no
car. But Bryan Motor Company, they were a Ford
dealer, said that they would give you a thousand
dollar graduation present if you were going on
active duty. And it could be used as a down payment
for a Ford automobile. So I went to Bryan Motor
Company and I got a Ford Club Coupe, they called it.
A sporty kind of a vehicle, first car I ever owned.
Never had one growing up, family didn't have one,
mother didn't. And they found the car cost $972.
Really it was $1,072, but it cost $972. And I went to
what was called the United States Automobile
Association at the time, USAA, and
got some insurance on the car. And the motor and the
Ford company made arrangements for us to get a
monthly loan. I forget the payments were $30 a
month, something like that. The second
lieutenant didn't make a whole lot of money, $125 a
month. cost $18 a month for subsistence, and yet
your regimental officer's club cost $30 a month.
But nevertheless, the money was pretty scarce. It
was tougher than hell, as a matter of fact. A first
lieutenant made $166.67. Don't ask me why that
was, but that was a whole lot more than a second
lieutenant made. A captain made $200.
A major $270.
The lieutenant colonel, $310 a month. Now,
when you graduated, did you still owe those loans,
that money? Sure. So in the summer, you had had a
job, but you hadn't made enough to pay off those
loans. That's right. When did you pay them off? As
soon as I started drawing $125 a month. First thing
I did was pay them. I don't owe any of them today, as
we sit and talk. I owe no man. How do you feel in
hindsight about that man that loaned you that
money? Well, forever grateful, because he was no
relation. He just had a big printing company, and I
lived in a house about two blocks from his printing
plant, so it was something less than River Oaks. As
a matter of fact, I lived two blocks from the
railroad tracks, and his man's name was Loudon.
and the printing company whose name was Stafford
Loudon and his son, and I graduated from the same
high school at the same time. And I just went to him
and told him I wanted to go to college, and I had no
way. And he wanted to, at the end of the year, he
wanted to see the report cards. So I reported to
him. He wanted to know what I was doing, what was
going on. I'm sure I was not the only one, but I never
knew if there were others. Because you never hear
anything like that from him. Did you sign a
contract? No. No. No, signed nothing. Did he lend
money only to Aggies? I have no idea what his
activities were. I never asked. Doesn't sound
like there's any ulterior motive on his part at
all. None. Did you pay him interest? No. No. Just
paid him the $100. Let's jump back. The student
body at that time, how diverse was it in the
background of the students?
Mostly
middle class America, I would say, and lower
middle class. From big cities, country, towns,
what? Mostly from the country, small towns.
It was not until post-World War II that we ever got a
graduate from Memorial High School near Houston.
I remember the first one. Did, were there- San
Antonio was a big A&M town. Were there any Hispanic
students?
A few, but mostly from foreign countries. Okay,
and how were they treated? Very well. We had some
from Puerto Rico. I had a Puerto Rican in my outfit,
Francisco Salvador Palantaba. Did you all have a
nickname for those Hispanics? No. Were there any
Jewish students? Yes. How were they treated? Very
well. Were there any nicknames for them? No, not
that I'm aware of. I just can remember at the
announcement at Evening Mess, once a month the
Hillel Club would meet and somebody would comment
about it. So you don't forget you got a meeting
tonight. To that extent there was, but you never
would say it to me. There were no Jewish boys in
Miami. Were there any Asian, students of Asian
ancestry? Yeah, there were a couple of Japs there
when we were there. One in a farming family down
here close to Houston. Do you remember the name? I
did at one time, but I've forgotten it now. Was it
Kishi? I don't remember. Let me turn it off. You
said there were two Japanese? Yes, I can't
remember. One was a great favorite. You don't
remember any Chinese? Not a single one. Middle
Eastern? No. Did it matter that a student was
Catholic? I don't think it made any difference to
anybody what their religion was or their faith.
All right, that's where I wanted to hit. Why? Well,
I don't know. Maybe it was... What determined a
student's importance among other students?
Whether he was a senior or a junior or a sophomore,
if you were a freshman. Let me tell you. A&M is the
most democratic institute. The Army is very
democratic. I can't tell you how many times I've
come out.